>> In the United States alone,
there are over 200 million cell
phones in use.
Globally, this figure
stands at 4.77 billion
and is expected to reach
6.1 billion by 2020.
>> Prior to 1984, wireless
technology was only used
in the military.
And in 1984 was the first move
to take wireless technology
into the consumer environment.
Cell phones, at the
time, they were excluded
from any premarket testing.
So they came onto the market
without any safety testing
at all.
[JUMBLE OF CELL-PHONE RINGTONES]
>> When we evolved
on the planet,
there was no microwave radiation
other than this infinitesimal
amount.
And what we have added
today is 1 billion times
more microwave radiation.
Our bodies didn't
evolve with it,
and we have no
protection against it.
So it's invisible,
but it's a very real
environmental pollutant.
>> If I ask you how much more
such radiation does penetrate
your body today, compared
to, like, 10 years ago,
is it twice as much?
Three times as much?
No, it's a quintillion
times more.
That's a 1 with 18 zeros.
>> EMF, or
ElectroMagnetic Fields,
are invisible forms of
energy, often referred
to as "radiation."
They are associated with
the use of electrical power
in various technologies,
including wireless devices.
>> We are electrical in nature.
We are made of the same
stuff as everything else.
We are made of
atoms, and atoms are
made of electrons, which are
negatively charged, protons
that are positively charged.
And we react to
electromagnetic fields.
So it's not surprising that we
respond to all kinds of things.
>> So there's various
kinds of radiation.
And one of the
distinctions that's made
is between ionizing radiation
and nonionizing radiation.
That distinction
reflects the energy
that the radiation delivers and
whether it breaks up molecules
as it passes through tissues.
>> The electromagnetic spectrum
measures different levels
of radiation.
Nonionizing radiation
emits lower energy,
while ionizing radiation
emits higher energy.
The higher the energy,
the more dangerous
it becomes for our health.
Most people are able to
tolerate lower energy
fields, such as AM/FM
radio, for example.
Wireless technology emits
nonionizing radiation
known as "radio frequencies."
Regulatory agencies
consider these emissions
safe for short periods of
time, but increased exposure
could have dangerous
biological effects.
The light from the
sun causes sunburn,
or skin cancer in some.
Overexposure to
X-rays and cosmic rays
are, [HISSING INHALE]
um, dangerous.
>> Where there's scientific
uncertainty and a need
for research is how nonionizing
radiation might cause some
of the diseases
that are of concern,
some of the diseases we've
seen epidemiologically.
So, yes, we know that
there's a potential to heat,
and then there are questions
about whether there
are other potential mechanisms.
>> As a society, we are very
fond of things that make life
easier or more enjoyable--
anything that provides
relief from the stress
of everyday life.
But history has shown our
enjoyment and dependence
on these things can blind
us to their adverse effects
and influence us to ignore
obvious warning signs.
>> Could where you carry your
cell phone make you sick?
Some doctors say they're seeing
evidence of cancer that could
be linked to mobile phones.
>> It's convenient,
say many young women.
>> It's probably the most
convenient place to put it,
especially when you go out.
You know, you put
your money on one--
[LAUGH] one breast and
your phone in the other.
>> If I'm wearing a dress ever,
I usually just slip it, like,
in the straps or
down in the center.
>> I used to carry my
cell phone in my bra,
whenever I'd use a
Bluetooth headset,
because the connection was poor.
Otherwise, if it was
anything further away,
it would just--
wouldn't work well.
I don't have a family
history of cancer.
And so cancer was
nowhere on the radar,
as far as something that I
thought that I would ever
have to deal with in my life.
I was diagnosed
with breast cancer,
and they found
five tumors, pretty
much in the footprint of
where the phone used to sit,
right in the kind of
center area of my chest.
The morning of my mammogram and
ultrasound, my husband and I
were trying to locate the lump.
We were going to mark
it with a Sharpie,
so that it would be easy to
point out to the person who
was going to do the testing.
And I pointed to one
spot, and he said--
and then he was
trying to feel it.
And he said, no,
no, it's right here.
And no, I said, it's right
here-- not realizing,
at the time, that
we had actually
found another one that morning.
>> I'm not the kind of person
that's an advocate for these
unusual problems.
I don't go onto crazy diets.
I don't worry about
the environment
maybe as much as I should.
I really am a focused physician.
But when Donna came
in with her case,
it kind of opened my mind.
It didn't convince me
there was a problem,
but I remember sitting, very
clearly looking at her slides
with the pathologist.
And I said, well, how
many tumors are there
in this breast?
She said, well,
there's basically
three dominant tumors.
But it wasn't until we looked
at her mastectomy specimen
under the microscope
and saw what wasn't just
a single cancer, but it
was multiple cancers.
But it was very extensive,
in a very unusual pattern.
And that's when it
clicked with me.
I said, you know, I
don't remember seeing
that pattern in anybody before.
And I remember her saying she
worried about her cell phone.
Could there be a connection?
>> The wireless industry
denies there's a problem,
citing a lack of scientific
evidence that cell phones cause
breast cancer.
>> There is no evidence,
but that's because we
haven't studied it.
>> We have cancer registries
in place that quite carefully
track new cancers among
children and adults.
They work with the hospitals,
the clinics, the pathologists
to identify each new case.
And this is to
help us understand
how much cancer there
is, what kinds there are,
and what directions
the rates are going.
Are they going up or down?
>> The question comes up, how
long would it take to prove
that cell phones could cause it,
based on the way we figured out
smoking caused lung cancer?
And there's no database.
All this stuff takes
years to accumulate.
The doctors, by
and large, aren't
asking patients, you know,
did you put your cell
phone in your bra?
Yes, a few of them are,
and I've had phone calls,
and I've had patients come to
me because their doctor made
the connection.
So it is happening, but it's
not like with lung cancer.
I think it may take
longer for cell phones
to accumulate enough
data to really prove
it's a risk factor
for breast cancer.
How is it that wireless
devices and Wi-Fi have
been able to permeate our daily
lives over the last 20 years
without the public
being made aware
of the associated dangers?
>> So, back in 1984, the two
key agencies were the FDA
for the devices and the
EPA for the infrastructure.
>> The FDA, or Food and
Drug Administration,
was established to protect and
promote public health through
the regulation of the food,
tobacco, veterinary, cosmetic,
and pharmaceutical industries.
The EPA, or Environmental
Protection Agency,
was created for the
purpose of protecting
human health and the environment
by writing and enforcing
regulations.
Neither agency had any
previous experience
with the regulation or safety
testing of new technology.
>> Both of those agencies
preempted either premarket
testing or postmarket
surveillance,
because, at the time, it was
felt that the power was so low
for cell-phone transmissions
that there could not be
heating.
And without heating there
could not be health effects.
>> My name is Jaimie.
I'm from Los
Angeles, California.
I'm a photographer.
And I'm electrosensitive.
>> Electrohypersensitivity,
or electrosensitivity,
is the sensitivity to
electromagnetic fields
in the environment.
>> I think when cell phones
first came out we'd have,
you know, the burning
feeling, the hot-ear syndrome,
kind of headache, but didn't
think anything about it,
because we were all told
they were awesome and safe.
Another aha moment was
when we had wireless.
Just watching movies
on the laptop,
the symptoms would start--
headache, brain fog, itchy eyes.
I just thought maybe I'm
staring at the screen too long.
Electrohypersensitivity, or EHS,
is currently not a recognized
medical diagnosis.
Experts are still divided
as to its validity.
And the World
Health Organization
claims there is no
diagnostic criteria
to link EHS to exposure
to electromagnetic fields
or microwave radiation.
>> I was diagnosed
with EHS in 2011.
>> And I became
electromagnetically
hypersensitive in 2009.
>> There are many symptoms,
but when I'm in a high EMF
environment or in a place
with a strong Wi-Fi,
first it starts off
with a burning sensation
in my forehead.
>> Dizziness, fatigue--
>> Pain in the back of my head.
>> Right in my neck,
and a headache.
>> Headache--
>> And my muscles start
pulsing or vibrating.
>> --where I feel like
I'm going to throw up.
>> Heart palpitations,
breathlessness, feeling faint.
>> I left my home
for three weeks,
and I didn't have a headache
the entire time I was gone.
I came back into my house.
My headaches returned.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> Microwave radiation is
the ultimate pollutant.
You can't see it, you can't
smell it, you can't hear it,
but you can feel it.
>> I think it's an interesting
area, too, for me personally,
as a doctor, to learn more about
the electrosensitive syndrome.
And I would hope
that there would
be criteria for the diagnosis--
which we don't have today.
My hope is that this
should be recognized
as a medical disorder
and, as such,
get an international
code of diseases.
That's one thing
which is urgent.
The other thing is to come up
with some kind of treatment
advice.
Because there are different
types of treatments.
>> There is an increasing
body of diagnostic tests
and guidelines that can
correlate the exposure
of a person to radiation and
the physiological effects quite
reliably.
Recently, Professor Dominique
Belpomme, from France,
tested about 700 people who
suffer from electrosensitivity.
His study showed severe
damage such as damage
to the immune system,
to the nervous system,
and established
additional biomarkers
for the diagnosis of
electrosensitivity.
>> I became very involved
in the cell-phone,
brain-tumor issue in 2008, when
my husband was diagnosed with
a brain tumor.
He had a grand mal seizure
in the middle of the night
and was rushed by ambulance
to our local hospital.
And within an hour they
had done a CT scan.
And they said he had a large
mass in his right frontal lobe.
He had to wait, though,
about two weeks for surgery.
And what was really
remarkable was
that our son had worked
for Senator Ted Kennedy.
He was an intern for him.
We've just learned, here,
in the last hour or so,
that Ted Kennedy
has a brain tumor.
That news--
>> So my son came
in, and he said Mom,
I have to talk to you about
something that's really
bothering me.
They think it was
his cell phone.
And I was just stunned,
because my husband was
a heavy user of a cell phone.
He always held it
to his right ear.
And his tumor grew, it was
his right frontal lobe.
I remember, that night, I
stayed up all night long,
searching the internet.
And I found all this information
that I had no idea existed.
And there were studies about it.
And there were
scientists in Sweden,
and there were other
people who were
talking about how cell phones
were causing brain tumors.
>> Today we're talking about
cell phones and brain cancer.
>> We don't know why
they're harmful, right?
>> Sheryl Crow was recently
diagnosed with a benign brain
tumor.
>> It's in my cell-phone area.
And there are doctors
that will confirm that.
>> There's no way to say
that cell-phone use is safe.
The public generally
assumes that,
if one is selling
something on the market,
that we have had assurances
that that device is safe.
>> When cell phones first
came into consumer use,
the purpose was to carry the
signal wirelessly only a little
ways and then to convert
the signal to the wired
infrastructure that we
had on landline, you know,
phone lines.
But, when we began the process
of moving to digital signal,
we had to have a different
kind of infrastructure.
So, recently, in the
past year or two,
there has been a lot more cell
towers popping up and down,
all over the place.
So there's the existing
one, right there.
Not sure whose it is.
So there she is, right there.
Thar she blows.
>> In 1985, the total number of
cell-phone towers in the United
States stood at just 900.
Today, that figure
stands north of 215,000.
[HUMMING/BUZZING]
>> What ended up happening was
that the infrastructure that
would be required to
deliver cell phone signals,
and later Wi-Fi, had to be
spread all across the country,
in what was called "cells."
That's why they call them
"cell phones," by the way.
It looks sort of like a beehive.
So that every cell was like
one of those little circles
in a beehive.
And what would happen
is that the signal
would go to a base station.
And then, as long as you were
within the cell, on your phone,
that cell tower would
be handling your call.
But as soon as you
moved into another cell,
it would hand off the signal
to the next cell tower.
And that required
an infrastructure
so that there's always a
transmission-and-reception loop
between the cell phone and the
infrastructure or the closest
base station.
That's also how the base
station knows where you are.
If you have good
signals in Maryland
but you don't have good
signals in Virginia,
Maryland would have a commercial
advantage in business.
It's about fairness.
And, when you go back
to our Constitution,
the Commerce Clause is one
of the big fairness clauses.
So it became a federal
program to build out
the infrastructure.
That was the rationale for
the federal government being
able to come in and, in
effect, in some cases step
on the rights of
individual citizens,
in order to build out
the infrastructure.
It's our system.
>> Everyone told us, you're
not going to be able to win.
You're not able to fight.
There's nothing you can do.
It's done.
It's going up.
It's happening.
And I said to myself, if
and when it does go up I
want to be able to look at it
and at least say to myself,
I tried.
>> We had, like, 10 days, so--
>> Yeah, and I ran around for
a week, couple hours a night,
trying to get signatures.
Then we got enough to go to City
Hall, get our foot in the door.
>> My message was that if
these cell towers were not safe
enough for the fire department
to have them where they live
and work, then why is it safe
enough to have near 3,000
children who go to school and
live in the immediate area.
That's how it came to pass that
we were able to stop the tower.
>> I live and breathe
by this technology.
I want to watch something
while stuck in the car.
I want to be able to justify
being stuck in traffic
and call my mom or
grandma on the phone.
>> It's a typical human thing,
that we have new technology,
we get very excited about it, we
use it, we push it really far,
and it has great applications.
However, many of
those often come
with health considerations.
And so, once those
become more evident
to the general population,
then we hopefully
force the government
and scientists
to come up with a safer way
of using that technology.
>> Today our world is
being remade, yet again,
by an information revolution,
changing the way we work,
the way we live, the way
we relate to each other.
With the stoke of
a pen, our laws
will catch up with our future.
[APPLAUSE]
>> In 1995 and 1996, we
began the process of a new
telecommunications.
And the Telecommunications Act,
now, was, for the first time,
written to put the FCC in the
role of a policing agency.
But the FCC's job,
as a commission,
was fair and equitable
use of spectrum.
The FCC was not a policing
agency, had nothing
to do with safety, had nothing
to do with monitoring-- only
to make sure that the different
phone companies didn't
cheat each other.
That's an important
point, because it
was the industry that lobbied
to have those changes made.
>> Recognizing the
regulatory void that existed,
the cellular industry
strategically positioned itself
to be influential in the kind
of research the government would
be carrying out on its products.
>> So the wireless industry
agreed to put up money from
the cell-phone industry.
And an interagency working group
of the United States government
was put in place to
oversee the work.
That project was called the
WTR, or Wireless Technology
Research.
And that's the program that I
ran, looking into the health
effects of wireless technology.
>> Ordinarily, in a
regulatory context,
new technologies would be tested
extensively before they reached
the marketplace, in order
to make sure that they
didn't present any
dangers to consumers.
In the case of cell phones,
and the wireless industry
as a whole, this crucial
stage was bypassed.
This meant the
regulatory agencies
were forced to rely on
postmarket surveillance.
>> I think the thing that
surprised me most and really
kind of caught my attention the
most, which I hadn't realized,
is that the manufacturers
actually tell people
in the instruction manual,
which I'd never read,
not to put the cell
phone against your ear.
>> The advice in the phone tells
you to keep it off the body,
because phones are
tested in two positions.
They are tested next to the
head and next to the body.
When they're tested
next to the head,
they're tested with a spacer.
The industry has
succeeded in getting
the FCC to accept an approach
where the phone is not
used like this.
And you know that this is
exactly how most people use
phones.
>> We were sort of caught
in a difficult place,
because some of the claims that
were being made about health
effects were so severe that, had
there been premarket testing,
cell phones never would have
made it into the marketplace.
So what happened was,
through some lobbying efforts
and in the Telecommunication
Act when it was finally passed,
the EPA's RF program
was defunded.
We didn't like what they were
saying, so let's get rid of it.
And that's what happened.
>> People deserve to
have the right to know.
The industry wants to
keep the cat in the bag,
as long as they possibly
can, that there is harm.
They don't like the
word "radiation."
They don't like
the word "safety."
They're against all
of this, because they
don't want to alarm
people and, the big thing
is, they have no liability
insurance, by Lloyd's of London
or Swiss RE, the two
top insurance companies.
>> "The main effect on the
insurance industry will concern
product liability claims
for bodily injury."
I'm involved in this issue
because I love my husband.
Just a few months after Alan had
his diagnosis of a brain tumor,
I ended up testifying to
the United States Congress
about it.
[GAVEL KNOCKS]
>> Today's hearing will examine
what science is saying about
the potential links between
long-term use of cell phones
and tumors or other
health effects.
>> I see this from the
public-health perspective
as being very, very important
that we urgently need more
research.
We have almost no US-funded
research in this area.
>> I'm not a scientist.
I'm a human being,
a mother, a wife.
I do know, from my research
and from talking with doctors
and scientists worldwide,
that there are major flaws,
even in this Interphone study.
I have in front of me
something right here
that says "the
Interphone studies always
find a statistical significant
elevated risk when a cell
phone has been used
for 10 or more years
on the same side of the head
where the tumor was found."
I'm sorry, but I'm
not understanding
the lack of correlation, here.
The FCC is debating the science.
And the FCC is a
captured agency.
They're captured by
the telecom industry.
There's a revolving door
between the telecom industry
and the FCC.
There's people that have
worked at the FCC that now
work for the telecom industry.
There's people that worked
for the telecom industry that
are now at the FCC.
>> When I myself look at
where people go for advice--
so, where would I go, as both
a parent and medical doctor?
I look at the World
Health Organization.
I look at my government and
the education authorities
and the groups like the
Department of Health.
And it's very hard
now to find groups
who are truly independent.
All of these groups
receive revenue
from the telecommunications
industry.
>> The wireless industry
spends $100 billion a year,
lobbying the Congress.
They have very good
access to the FCC.
So it's really hard to
go up against the power
of this industry, even when you
have the facts on your side.
>> Despite the industry attempts
to suppress the findings
of the scientific community,
scientists continue
their pioneering research into
the adverse effects from EMF
and RF exposures.
>> We're having a serious
problem with global fertility
reducing.
There's evidence now that
men who use cell phones,
they have deformed sperm.
They have sperm that moves
much more slowly, dies
much more quickly.
And all of this is going
to affect their ability
to successfully
impregnate their partners.
>> Men who carry their cell
phones in their pockets are
carrying them right
next to their testes.
And the sperm cells
are vulnerable.
>> Girls are born with all
their eggs in an ovary,
so it's pretty much
guarded until puberty.
The testes are exposed, in
turn, much more accessible
to radiation.
And, as a result,
they get irradiated.
And the interesting
thing is that, when
a spermatocyte
gets irradiated, it
keeps on making sperm cells--
with the mutations.
>> If there is a genetic
change, a mutation,
that modification will be
maintained throughout the life
of the individual.
Women of reproductive
age should be so careful,
in terms of their exposures,
because they can influence
the health of their
child even before they
know that they're pregnant.
>> The fetus is
programming itself,
which means that every cell
of the fetus is getting
information from outside--
from the environment,
from the mother.
All these can make a sort of
mismatch in his programming.
>> Of all the stages of life,
the fetus is by far the most
vulnerable.
And that's for multiple reasons.
First of all, the fetus
is growing cells, rapidly.
So cells are dividing rapidly.
So, if there is an exposure,
that can influence the fetus
and can alter the whole lifespan
of the subsequent child.
>> When something appears to
be caused by an environmental
influence, one ought to figure
out what it would cost to take
care of it or to do something to
ameliorate its effects and how
it compares to what would happen
if we did nothing and we'd have
to do the cleanup
work afterwards.
>> And in 2007 we published
the first BioInitiative Report.
And that report is basically
an encyclopedia or a compendium
of all the science
in public health
that comes to bear on the
issue of whether EHS--
and now radio-frequency
radiation--
are, in fact
cancer-causing and are
perhaps a cause of neurological
diseases like Alzheimer's
and cognitive problems
and developmental problems
in children, like autism.
So scientists
decided it was time
to counter the industry claims
that there is no evidence.
>> Now, the thing is, it
came out, and there were--
obviously, there were a number
of people who didn't like it,
because, they
said, first of all,
it's not an authorized group.
(LAUGHING) I don't
know what they
wanted an authorized group.
They want a bunch of fat
cats or political characters?
These were scientists who
were talking about the stuff
that they're working on.
The BioInitiative
has been criticized,
and it was also
considered pretty good.
And one of the people who
considered it pretty good
was the European Parliament,
who used that as an argument
for saying that
one ought to look
at the electromagnetic
safety standards.
>> Today's research struggles
to keep up with technology,
as more and more aspects of our
daily lives become dependent
on wireless devices.
This is particularly true
for children, many of whom
have known nothing else other
than the age of smartphones
and tablets.
>> A little more
than 10 years ago,
my first grandson was born.
And when he was
nine months of age,
he could find a cell phone,
turn it on, and play a game.
So I was, of course, very
proud of how smart he was.
But I began to look into what we
know about the developing brain
and how it is affected
by different things.
I been a CDC advisor
on lead poisoning,
and I knew that
the brain doubled
in the first year of life and
that we go to great lengths
to protect children's
brains from lead poisoning.
And here we were, exposing
them to something that
had never really been tested.
So the more I looked into this,
the more concerned I became.
>> We have a number of
barriers in our body to protect
important tissues.
And we have ones in the brain
to protect the brain from toxins
and bacteria--
heavy metals.
And what this means is that
some of the toxic things that
can be transported in blood
don't cross into these very
sensitive tissues.
So they have barriers.
In the case of the brain,
it's called the "blood-brain
barrier."
In the early work
with microwaves,
Allan Frey, who was one of the
early workers in this area,
published a paper where
he found that, when
he put a dye into the blood,
shortly after exposure you
suddenly found it in the
cerebral spinal fluid.
Obviously, what happened is the
blood-brain barrier had leaked.
The blood-brain barrier
leakage is apt to be [LAUGH]
a rather important effect, in
terms of the pathology that
can result from people.
Because, if you're
going to contaminate
the environment
of the brain, you
can expect all
kinds of odd things
to be happening on
exposure to EMF.
>> The exposures that we
now have are unprecedented.
I remember a life without
this kind of radiation.
But the children
that we have now
are going to view
the internet the way
that we view electricity.
They'll think that
it's just something
that, of course, is
OK, because they never
knew life without it.
But, in terms of legislation
to protect children,
yeah, the level in classrooms,
in my opinion, should be zero.
>> We are the second-largest
school district in the nation.
With the demands of
the school district
and the demands of getting the
kids into the 21st century,
the school district-- the board
of education, in particular--
asked the office of
environmental health and safety
to take a look at wireless
in all its classrooms.
And so the district,
wanting to move forward
with the technology, wanting to
meet the demands of the state
in terms of the testing
that needs to be done,
we need to look at how
we can accomplish that.
And certainly Wi-Fi
is really a good fit
and a good answer for it.
But, again, we need to look at
that in terms of its safety.
And a lot of people claim
that, even at very low levels,
there are adverse health
effects associated
with these
radio-frequency exposures.
>> The particular concern
is when you have a wireless
classroom in schools.
You have one router, and
you have 20 or 30 kids
with a wireless laptop.
That is going to be a really
hot Wi-Fi environment.
And those children are
going to be exposed
to that radio-frequency
radiation for as long
as they're in that classroom.
>> The district felt that
we should establish our own
internal threshold for
acceptable exposure.
And so what we've
done was we've looked
at the available
research, and the district
has set a threshold
of acceptable exposure
at 10,000 times lower than
the current FCC standards.
>> 25 years ago, when the
FCC standards were adopted
for thermal effects, we didn't
have all of these wireless
devices.
And the impacts on health
weren't epidemiologically
visible, which they are today.
>> So the phase one of
our program rolled out.
A number of schools
received these end devices.
Access points were installed.
And students began to use them.
>> One piece of this is
particularly important,
and that is the tablet itself.
These tablets are extremely
high radio-frequency emitters.
They have either three
or four or five antennas
built into the areas
where you can hold one.
When I looked at the
Apple user's guide--
and if you take the time
to scroll through it,
and you look at radio-frequency
radiation issues,
there is a paragraph that
will light your hair on fire,
because it says--
>> "A small percentage of people
may be susceptible to blackouts
or seizures.
Discontinue use of iPad
and consult a physician
if you experience headaches,
blackouts, seizures,
convulsion, eye or muscle
twitching, loss of awareness,
involuntary movement,
or disorientation."
>> We've got an analogy of
a classroom being the inside
of a microwave oven
set at very low power.
Children are exposed to that
Wi-Fi radiation six hours,
every school day, five days a
week, and for several months
during the year,
13 years of school.
It's a very disturbing
trend that we're setting up
by irradiating some of the
youngest and most vulnerable
people in our population.
>> I used to be the Ashland
Education Foundation president.
And I ran seven
different campaigns
to bring technology into Ashland
public schools over the years.
We have something in Ashland
public schools called "Best
Practices for Mobile Devices."
In our classrooms, when
we're not using the Wi-Fi
we should be turning it off.
And when we are not
using devices actively,
then we should be
turning them off.
We are the first
public-school district
in the nation to address this.
>> A wired computer classroom
will not expose your child
to radio-frequency radiation.
>> People have brought this to
our attention and recommended
that a wired technology--
fiber optic, for example--
is certainly a better
way to go and might even
be more reliable.
And we understand that.
But the district,
because of what's
happened in 2009, moving forward
to today, with the requirements
under the Common Core
program, the testing,
and the sheer number of
schools and classrooms,
to actually meet the
time line and actually
go ahead and put 30 drops
in an individual classroom
is an unbelievable, daunting
task and, I don't think,
logistically possible.
>> While hardwired classrooms
would greatly reduce
children's exposure
to radio frequencies,
there's still a growing concern
that children are spending too
much time in front of screens.
>> The American
Academy of Pediatrics,
their guidelines are, no more
than one to two hours of screen
time a day.
For kids under
three, zero hours.
So I think we need to
look at how much of that
is interactive screen
time and how much is
at school, how much is at home.
>> Kids become addicted
to their signals.
You know, you can go
into a nice restaurant,
and there are four people
sitting at a table,
and they're all doing this.
>> To be able to focus, to
be able to remember things,
to link complex thought, to
track somebody's facial emotion
as it has subtle shifts, all of
these things require incredibly
high levels of subtle,
coordinated brain function.
That general concept, to me,
is what links the various brain
problems that people are facing,
ranging from Alzheimer's, where
you can't remember, to attention
deficit, where you can't focus,
to behavioral
dysregulation, where
little things send
you flying off
in one direction or another.
When you look at all of
these at the chemical level,
you see varying
degrees of severity
of depletion of protective
substances like glutathione
in the brain.
And you see brainwave changes.
>> In addition to that, there's
a few things with electronics
that seem to impact sleep.
The first is the screen itself.
The light from the screen tends
to be a bluish or whitish tone,
and that mimics
daylight, and the brain
thinks it needs to be alert.
When that happens, melatonin,
which is the sleep signal,
gets suppressed
for several hours.
So, even 10 minutes or so
screen time in an evening
will suppress melatonin.
When melatonin's
suppressed, we don't
get the benefit of it fighting
inflammation in the brain.
And we know that
kids with ADHD, they
have abnormally low
melatonin to begin with.
>> There has been a 53%
increase, in the past decade,
in all 11% of kids who've been
diagnosed with the disorder
and approximately two thirds are
being treated with medications
like Ritalin and Adderall.
>> On the surface, the
answer would appear simple--
monitor your
child's screen time,
and limit their exposure
to wireless technology.
But the reality is that
taking away their devices
may not be enough.
>> Smart meters are
the new, or newer,
meters that are replacing the
analog meters on your home
electric meters and gas meters.
It uses electromagnetic
frequency
to send DTE information
about power use.
This gets rid of the
need for meter readers
and notifies the power
company about outages.
But some say such meters
are making them sick.
>> Many, many people
who are perfectly fine,
prior to the installation
of the smart meter that goes
into their house, they can't
sleep, they have headaches,
they have depression.
And it's coincident with the
going in of the smart meter.
>> This is similar to the
radiation debate over cell
phones and cancer, right?
>> Yes.
This is very similar to
that debate, in that it's
the same kind of radiation, and
the research into its safety
is not conclusive.
But here's the big difference.
You can choose how often you
use your cell phone, right?
But with smart meters
you don't have a choice.
The frequency with which you
are exposed to this radiation
is determined by
the power company.
>> We're confident in the specs
of our meters and the safeness
of the meters, at this point.
>> What Pepco says is happening
is that these smart meters send
out communications every four
to six hours, on a daily basis.
But what we're seeing is
that these smart meters
communicate about four to six
times a minute, if not more.
>> When we lived in
Lafayette, years ago,
it was one of the first areas of
deployment of the smart meters.
And I absolutely
did not want one,
because I knew that this
nonionizing radiation was not
healthy.
So I called to opt out,
and they said at the time
there was no opt-out.
And I said, I want this
thing off my house.
And they did do it.
It doesn't seem
fair to me that we
have to opt out of
something we don't want,
but people can do that.
They can call, and they
can opt out of the meter.
>> The driving force of the
21st century will be powerful
processing, centralized
in the cloud,
and wirelessly connected
to thin clients.
Autonomous vehicles will
be controlled in the cloud.
Smart city energy grids,
transportation networks,
and water systems will be
controlled in the cloud.
Immersive education
and entertainment
will come from the cloud.
But such futures
won't come to pass
unless the pathway
to and from the cloud
is low-latency,
ultra-fast, and secure.
>> 5G's been approved.
The FCC voted on it.
It's going to be rolled out.
It will be faster, and it'll
take up more of the spectrum.
>> 5G has an enormous
amount of promise.
It's expected to enable
all sorts of things
like virtual reality,
self-driving cars.
You could potentially download
a movie within a couple seconds.
- With 5G comes the
small cell equipment
that they're going to be putting
on every pole in every city,
right outside people's
windows, or on fake mailboxes.
Nobody has taken into account
the cumulative radiation
that we are all getting,
especially children!
And there were no premarket
safety testing on any of this!
>> (CHANTING) Smart meters kill!
>> So many people involved in
the science around this issue
are out there, arguing for
massive change to everything,
from tearing down the structure
that we have of regulation
and public safety to
getting rid of technology,
to do all kinds of
things that are extreme.
Fact is, none of those
things are going to happen.
It really has to be solved
more from a regulatory point
of view, more from a
population-based point of view.
>> Good evening.
The World Health
Organization today
says cell phones are
possibly carcinogenic.
>> People are hearing that the
World Health Organization --
that's the medical arm
of the United Nations--
is sounding the alarm
about cell phones.
>> It puts it in the company of
several other kinds of things,
like lead is also a
possible carcinogen,
according to the WHO, as well as
engine exhaust and chloroform.
>> That classification
has been done in 2011.
Since that time, we have
at least two large studies
suggest that it
should be reclassified
as at least group 2A.
Or some people
believe that it should
be reclassified as group 1--
so, it's 100% carcinogenic,
in other words.
>> The classification means
there cannot be an assurance
of safety.
And it signals a need
for more research.
And then, for some, it
would signal the need
for being
precautionary, in terms
of handling this exposure.
>> In view of our present
scientific knowledge,
we hereby stress
international institutions,
particularly the World
Health Organization,
to recognize EHS and MCS.
Although our scientific
knowledge remains incomplete,
we unanimously acknowledge
this serious hazard
to public health,
urgently requiring
the recognition of these
two pathological disorders
at international level.
[APPLAUSE]
>> What is really needed,
and what this conference was
intended to provide, is a strong
statement to the World Health
Organization that there is
sufficient scientific evidence
today to classify
electrosensitivity as a medical
condition.
And what this will
do is go a long way
toward letting
physicians know they've
got to get educated and learn
to began to treat patients
with this condition.
>> There are signs that the
message is beginning to sink
in.
Some countries are
adopting laws to reduce
children's exposure in schools.
The European Parliament and
some European legal courts
are starting to acknowledge
the correlation between EHS
and radio-frequency exposure.
Today, Sweden recognizes EHS
as a functional impairment.
>> If the World Health
Organization recognized
electrosensitivity
as a real thing,
I think it would help
in a lot of ways.
You know, talking to the
teachers about it, they--
you know, if you
could show them,
you know, it's not
just me, the parent,
it's the doctors,
the scientists.
>> When this first came up, that
we realized we might have some
sensitivity issues in our house,
the first thing we did was just
turned off the
wireless at night.
And that seemed like
the easiest first step.
We hard-lined completely.
And we have the plug-ins.
>> Here is what
helps us hard-line.
Plug it into here.
Signal's going
through the walls,
and it's going to come out here.
And welcome to my office.
Plug it in here,
grab the signal,
and send the signal through
this Thunderbolt, here.
- I can still use
the laptop computer
and take it anywhere
in the house I want to,
but I just plug it in to
whatever the nearest outlet is.
>> These are all things
that immediately will reduce
your exposure.
Use a wired earpiece.
Concentrate on speakerphone.
>> The worst time to put a phone
right next to the head is when
you say "hello," because it's
programmed to go to max power.
100 times a minute, it
says, where are you,
here I am, where
are you, here I am.
We can change that.
You can program it to
do that less often.
You can have it go, as
the Android system does,
into a deep sleep, so
that it doesn't always
ping you back and forth.
>> Be aware of the number of
sources of wireless that sneak
into everyday life.
As you layer up,
your dose actually
is larger and larger as
we're, at the same time,
deciding we have to have
lower and lower exposures
to protect our
health, our sleep,
and the next generations.
>> Because of my sensitivities
we wanted to address it
at the boys' school, because
all the schools are wireless.
Every school is wireless.
So we asked them,
at least if they're
going to be in there
all day, can we at least
take out one of
the factors and not
have their laptops be wireless?
So, by doing that, we
were able to convince them
to hard-line their computers.
>> Nowadays, because there's
so many kids that have food
allergies that we've
explained it to the teachers
and the other kids in the
class as kind of a similarity,
just as you wouldn't make every
kid in the class eat peanut,
because some kids have
a sensitivity to that,
please don't make every kid
in the class use wireless.
>> Alan's situation now is
that he's been fortunate.
He's alive and doing fairly
well, eight years later.
He does have to go for MRIs
every four months, to see
if there's any new growth.
And thankfully
there has not been.
>> I live six months at a time.
You never know when
you're going to come out
and it's going to be--
you know, they're going
to say it's growing again.
She sees what I'm going
through and what our family's
going through and
doesn't want to see
that happen to anybody else.
Just calling it Right to Know
says what it's all about.
I'm really proud of you!
>> Thanks.
>> All this work is in
response to my illness.
And it means a lot to me!
>> Thanks.
It's a very, very tough fight.
And it's been a long time.
I've been involved in this
for about eight years.
And there's times where
I feel like giving up,
and then there's times
where I say no, we're
going to make progress.
I'm not going to stop.
And it's usually when I hear
from more and more people,
every day, that are
sensitive to wireless,
or I hear from people,
every week or two,
that their spouse has
a brain tumor that they
think is from their cell phone,
then I say, I'm not giving up.
I do have a certain
sense of optimism
that eventually the
right thing will
happen, like it
did with tobacco,
like it did with asbestos.
>> Every day, new
technologies enrich our lives.
5G and all its wonders is
coming to a lamppost near you.
So take precautionary steps
to reduce your exposure.
Whenever possible,
favorite good,
old-fashioned wired connections.
Use airplane mode
as much as you can.
And before you go
to sleep, remember
to turn off your Wi-Fi routers
and all emitting devices.
Make a change, tonight.
>> (SINGING) We can do this.
We can get it right.
We can do this.
Mute your screen tonight.
Turn it off, now.
You can dim the lights.
Many choices.
Now here's our advice.
We get wise, get wired!
Get off the grid,
get off the grid!
We get wise, get wired!
Get off the grid,
get off the grid!
We can do this.
Make a change tonight.
Use less Wi-Fi.
Keep it wired.
Keep it all in sight.
Getting smart now.
Turn off all the lights.
We get wise, get wired!
Get off the grid,
get off the grid!